S4 OOP
======

S4 is a more formal version of [S3](s3.md).

Creating classes in S4
----------------------

We create new S4 classes using the `setClass` function. We need to
specify both the name of the class, and which attributes the class has
(in R terminology: `slots`).

    setClass("GenericSeq", 
              slots=list(
                name="character",
                alphabet="character",
                sequence="character"
              ))

This declares a new class `GenericSeq` which contains three pieces of
information, each of type `character`.

We create a new object of this class by using `new()`:

    genseq = new("GenericSeq", name="A generic sequence", alphabet=c("A", "T"), sequence="AATTTAAATTTTT")

When calling `new` R will check if the supplied slots match the
definition, so this will give an error:

    genseq = new("GenericSeq", name=10, alphabet=c("A", "T"), sequence="ATTTA")

    ## Error in validObject(.Object): invalid class "GenericSeq" object: invalid object for slot "name" in class "GenericSeq": got class "numeric", should be or extend class "character"

We can access the slots directly by using a special `@` operators, or
using `slots` progamatically:

    genseq

    ## An object of class "GenericSeq"
    ## Slot "name":
    ## [1] "A generic sequence"
    ## 
    ## Slot "alphabet":
    ## [1] "A" "T"
    ## 
    ## Slot "sequence":
    ## [1] "AATTTAAATTTTT"

    genseq@name

    ## [1] "A generic sequence"

    slot(genseq, "name")

    ## [1] "A generic sequence"

    slotNames(genseq)

    ## [1] "name"     "alphabet" "sequence"

S4 generics
-----------

S4 methods use a similar `dispatch` logic as S3, but uses its own system
of generics.

Bioconductor packages `BiocGenerics`, `ProtGenerics` and `Biobase`
define a large number of S4 generics used in the Bioconductor project,
and are the first place to look for generics to re-use.

    suppressMessages(library(BiocGenerics))
    suppressMessages(library(ProtGenerics))
    suppressMessages(library(Biobase))

Multiple regular R functions have been turned into S4 generics, e.g.:

    base::nrow

    ## function (x) 
    ## dim(x)[1L]
    ## <bytecode: 0x7f97ec3b86b0>
    ## <environment: namespace:base>

    BiocGenerics::nrow

    ## standardGeneric for "nrow" defined from package "base"
    ## 
    ## function (x) 
    ## standardGeneric("nrow")
    ## <environment: 0x7f97eb74c5f0>
    ## Methods may be defined for arguments: x
    ## Use  showMethods("nrow")  for currently available ones.

    base::ncol

    ## function (x) 
    ## dim(x)[2L]
    ## <bytecode: 0x7f97eb8cf628>
    ## <environment: namespace:base>

    BiocGenerics::ncol

    ## standardGeneric for "ncol" defined from package "base"
    ## 
    ## function (x) 
    ## standardGeneric("ncol")
    ## <environment: 0x7f97eb840a28>
    ## Methods may be defined for arguments: x
    ## Use  showMethods("ncol")  for currently available ones.

This means that it is easy to re-define the behaviour of these functions
for your own class.

More examples here:

-   [BiocGenerics
    generics](https://github.com/Bioconductor-mirror/BiocGenerics/tree/master/R)
-   [ProtGenerics
    generics](https://github.com/Bioconductor-mirror/ProtGenerics/tree/master/R)
-   [Biobase
    generics](https://github.com/Bioconductor-mirror/Biobase/blob/master/R/AllGenerics.R)

### Creating S4 generics

If we think we'll need some functionality implemented differently for
different classes, we might want to create a generic so that dispatching
makes this invisible to the user.

We only need to create an S4 generic if it doens't exist as an S3
generic (or as a primitive e.g. `length()`). Every S3 generic (e.g.
`summary()`) has an automatic S4 generic as well.

Lets make a new generic `complement` which we'll use with multiple
classes.

First, lets check it doesn't exist

    complement # see if exists as S3 generic

    ## Error in eval(expr, envir, enclos): object 'complement' not found

    isGeneric("complement") # see if it exists as S4 generic

    ## [1] FALSE

We define our own generics using `setGeneric`:

    setGeneric("complement", 
        function(object, ...) standardGeneric("complement")
    )

    ## [1] "complement"

NOTE: the formal arguments of the generic acts as a templated for the
formal arguments of all the implementations. It's good practice to
always add `...` to the end to enable methods to introduce additional
parameters.

Creating S4 methods
-------------------

For existing generics we define our own implementation with `setMethod`.

    length(genseq) # before defining our implementation

    ## [1] 1

    setMethod("length", "GenericSeq", function(x) nchar(x@sequence))

    ## [1] "length"

    length(genseq)

    ## [1] 13

*NOTE*: when implementing generics in S4, make sure the arguments to
your implementation match those of the generic. So, `length` has `x` as
a parameters:

    length

    ## function (x)  .Primitive("length")

and so should our implementation `function(x) ...`.

### Exercise: Create a custom `rev` implementation

Create a custom implementation of `rev` for `GenericSeq` that will
return a new `GenericSeq` objects where the sequence has been reversed.

### Solution

    setMethod("rev", "GenericSeq", function(x){
      letters = strsplit(x@sequence, "")[[1]]
      reversed = paste(rev(letters), collapse="")
      
      new("GenericSeq", name=paste(x@name, "--reversed"), alphabet=x@alphabet, sequence=reversed)
    })

    ## [1] "rev"

    genseq

    ## An object of class "GenericSeq"
    ## Slot "name":
    ## [1] "A generic sequence"
    ## 
    ## Slot "alphabet":
    ## [1] "A" "T"
    ## 
    ## Slot "sequence":
    ## [1] "AATTTAAATTTTT"

    rev(genseq)

    ## An object of class "GenericSeq"
    ## Slot "name":
    ## [1] "A generic sequence --reversed"
    ## 
    ## Slot "alphabet":
    ## [1] "A" "T"
    ## 
    ## Slot "sequence":
    ## [1] "TTTTTAAATTTAA"

The seperation of implementation and interface
----------------------------------------------

Best practice:

1.  The *user* should *never* have to use the `@` operator. This
    operator is for the developer.

2.  The *user* should *never* have to call `new()`, but create objects
    with functions we write as wrappers around `new()`. See for example
    the `sequences::readFasta` function below. Often, one can also
    create a constructure named as the class that takes user-sensible
    inputs to assess the slots when calling `new()`.

<!-- -->

    library("sequences")
    fl <- dir(system.file("extdata", package = "sequences"),
              full.names = TRUE)[1]
    basename(fl)
    readFasta(fl)

As developers, we should be writing *functions and methods* for the user
to use our object. How the object is internally implemented is of no
interest to the user. The interface (functions and methods) should be
kept stable over time, not to break any external code that depends on
our code, while the internal implementation can evolve rapidly.

### Implementing accessors as methods

We can implement methods to read and modify the properties of our
object:

    setGeneric("name", function(object, ...) standardGeneric("name"))

    ## [1] "name"

    setGeneric("name<-", function(object, value) standardGeneric("name<-"))

    ## [1] "name<-"

    setMethod("name", "GenericSeq", function(object, ...) object@name)

    ## [1] "name"

    setReplaceMethod("name", signature(object="GenericSeq", value="character"), 
                     function(object, value){
                       object@name <- value
                       return(object)
                     })

    ## [1] "name<-"

The first generic is a regular generic we saw before. The second is a
generic for a "replacement method" that supported the replacement syntax
`name(genseq) = "New name"`.

We can use these to work with our object:

    name(genseq)

    ## [1] "A generic sequence"

    name(genseq) = "New name"
    name(genseq)

    ## [1] "New name"

In our case, both methods have a very simple implementations, but this
gives us an opportunity to continue working on the implementation. E.g.
at some point we might decide we want to keep all the information in a
big-data backend. We can change our internal implementation, e.g. the
object might now have a single slot that is the connection to the big
data backend, but we would keep the methods the same, and from user's
perspective everything would still works the same, but better.

*Discussion*: do we need one method per every slot? Do we need to use
methods, or can we also use functions?

### Exercise

Implement methods for getting the setting the `sequence` property of our
`GenericSeq` object.

### Solution

    setGeneric("sequence", function(object, ...) standardGeneric("sequence"))

    ## Creating a new generic function for 'sequence' in the global environment

    ## [1] "sequence"

    setGeneric("sequence<-", function(object, value) standardGeneric("sequence<-"))

    ## [1] "sequence<-"

    setMethod("sequence", "GenericSeq", function(object, ...) object@sequence)

    ## [1] "sequence"

    setReplaceMethod("sequence", signature(object="GenericSeq", value="character"), 
                     function(object, value){
                       object@sequence <- value
                       return(object)
                     })

    ## [1] "sequence<-"

    sequence(genseq)

    ## [1] "AATTTAAATTTTT"

    sequence(genseq) = "TAATTTT"
    sequence(genseq)

    ## [1] "TAATTTT"

*NOTE*: `sequence` already exists in base R, and we've broken it:

    base::sequence

    ## function (nvec) 
    ## unlist(lapply(nvec, seq_len))
    ## <bytecode: 0x7f97ef5ad510>
    ## <environment: namespace:base>

    base::sequence(c(3,2))

    ## [1] 1 2 3 1 2

    sequence(c(3,2))

    ## Error in (function (classes, fdef, mtable) : unable to find an inherited method for function 'sequence' for signature '"numeric"'

To make sure we haven't broken any code we'll create a default S4 method
that will default to the base R function:

    setMethod("sequence", "ANY", function(object,...) base::sequence(object))

    ## [1] "sequence"

    sequence(c(3,2))

    ## [1] 1 2 3 1 2

Alternatively, we could've used a different name, e.g. one with an
existing generic `seq` (pros? cons?) or a completely new name e.g.
`genericSeq()`.

Validity
--------

Objects might have further contrains on them, e.g. in our case, we
assume that `alphabet` slot matches the letters used in the `sequence`
slot.

We can attach custom validity checks to our object.

    setValidity("GenericSeq", function(object){
      # check if the alphabet matches letters in sequence
      letters = strsplit(object@sequence, "")[[1]]
      if(!all(letters %in% object@alphabet)){
        return("The alphabet does not match the sequence")
      }
      return(TRUE)
    })

    ## Class "GenericSeq" [in ".GlobalEnv"]
    ## 
    ## Slots:
    ##                                     
    ## Name:       name  alphabet  sequence
    ## Class: character character character

    validObject(genseq)

    ## [1] TRUE

To ensure that the object remains valid we can include it in our
`sequence` replacement method implementation:

    setReplaceMethod("sequence", signature(object="GenericSeq", value="character"), 
                     function(object, value){
                       object@sequence <- value
                       if(validObject(object))
                         return(object)
                     })

    ## [1] "sequence<-"

So now trying to set an invalid value for the `sequence` will result in
a validity error:

    sequence(genseq) = "ATTAAAAAAAA" # this still works as the object is valid
    sequence(genseq) = "ABCD" # this produces an error

    ## Error in validObject(object): invalid class "GenericSeq" object: The alphabet does not match the sequence

Introspection
-------------

Because S4 is more formal and explicit there are multiple functions you
can use to find out information about your and other people's classes.

    showMethods("rev")
    getClass("GenericSeq")
    getMethod("rev", "GenericSeq")
    findMethods("rev")
    showMethods(classes="GenericSeq")
    isGeneric("rev")

Over-riding default object display
----------------------------------

We can over-ride how the object is shown to the user. The default is:

    genseq

    ## An object of class "GenericSeq"
    ## Slot "name":
    ## [1] "New name"
    ## 
    ## Slot "alphabet":
    ## [1] "A" "T"
    ## 
    ## Slot "sequence":
    ## [1] "ATTAAAAAAAA"

We can over-ride this by implementing `show`:

    setMethod("show",
              "GenericSeq",
              function(object) {
                cat("Object of class",class(object),"\n")
                cat(" Name:", object@name,"\n")
                cat(" Length:",length(object),"\n")
                cat(" Alphabet:",object@alphabet,"\n")
                cat(" Sequence:",object@sequence, "\n")
              })

    ## [1] "show"

    genseq

    ## Object of class GenericSeq 
    ##  Name: New name 
    ##  Length: 11 
    ##  Alphabet: A T 
    ##  Sequence: ATTAAAAAAAA

This is useful for the same reasons of separating implementation and
interface.

Overriding operators
--------------------

It might be useful to override operators such as `[`, `$`, `+`, ... All
of these already have generics we just need to implement them:

    findMethods("[")@generic

    ## standardGeneric for "[" defined from package "base"
    ## 
    ## function (x, i, j, ..., drop = TRUE) 
    ## standardGeneric("[", .Primitive("["))
    ## <bytecode: 0x7f97eb672808>
    ## <environment: 0x7f97eb66a678>
    ## Methods may be defined for arguments: x, i, j, drop
    ## Use  showMethods("[")  for currently available ones.

    setMethod("[","GenericSeq",
              function(x,i,j="missing",drop="missing") {
                if (any(i > length(x)))
                  stop("subscript out of bounds")
                s <- sequence(x)
                s <- paste(strsplit(s,"")[[1]][i], collapse="")
                x@sequence <- s
                if (validObject(x))
                  return(x)
              })

    ## [1] "["

We can now use the `[` notation to create new `GenericSeq` objects that
contain the subset of the sequence.

    sequence(genseq)

    ## [1] "ATTAAAAAAAA"

    genseq[1:3]

    ## Object of class GenericSeq 
    ##  Name: New name 
    ##  Length: 3 
    ##  Alphabet: A T 
    ##  Sequence: ATT

Inheritance
-----------

When we create a new class, we can set it to inherit the slots and
methods of another class.

    setClass("DNASeq",
             contains="GenericSeq",
             slots=list(
               adapterSeq="character"
             ))

In this example `contains` signifies that the `DNASeq` class inherits
the `GenericSeq` class. So `DNASeq` will have all the slots of
`GenericSeq` plus the one new one we defined:

    dnaseq = new("DNASeq", name="Illumina short sequence", 
                 sequence="ATGAAAAAGGG", alphabet=c("A", "C", "G", "T"),
                 adapterSeq="ATGA")
    slotNames(dnaseq)

    ## [1] "adapterSeq" "name"       "alphabet"   "sequence"

All the methods we defined for `GenericSeq` still work:

    sequence(dnaseq)

    ## [1] "ATGAAAAAGGG"

    length(dnaseq)

    ## [1] 11

Using S4 in packages
====================

When using S4 in a package, we need to make sure that generics and class
definitions are sourced *before* methods. The easiest way to achieve
this is by naming convention.

When loading a package R sources files alphabetically (in absence of
`Collate` in the `DESCRIPTION` file), so if we name our files like this
the they will be sourced in the correct order for S4:

-   `AllGenerics.R`
-   `DataClasses.R`
-   all other files starting with a lowercase letter

Exporting S4 in a package
-------------------------

To make S4 classes, methods and generics available for the user of your
package, you need to export them in the `NAMESPACE` file. Your namespace
file might look like this:

    exportClasses(GenericSeq)

    exportMethods(name, "name<-",
                  sequence, "sequence<-",
                  "[",
                  show,
                  rev,
                  length)

We use `exportClasses` to export our classes, `exportMethods` to export
all of our method implementations and any associated generics.

Documenting S4
--------------

R can generate template documentation files for classes and generic's
methods using `promptClass("GenericSeq")` and
`promptMethods("sequence")` where `sequence` is the name of the generic
we want to document.

If you wish to keep the documentation together with the code you can use
the `roxygen2` package:

    #' GenericSeq class
    #'
    #' A class representing operations with a generic sequence. 
    #'
    #' @export
    setClass("GenericSeq", 
              slots=list(
                name="character",
                alphabet="character",
                sequence="character"
              ))


    #' Get the sequence
    #'
    #' @rdname sequence-methods
    setGeneric("sequence", function(object, ...) standardGeneric("sequence"))

    ## [1] "sequence"

    #' @rdname sequence-methods 
    #' @export
    setMethod("sequence", "GenericSeq", function(object, ...) object@sequence)

    ## [1] "sequence"

In this example we've exported the class and method, and put the
documentation for the generic and the method into the same `.rd` file
name `sequence-methods.rd`. You can now generate the the `NAMESPACE` and
`.rd` documentation files by running
`roxygenise("path/to/your/package")`.

Summary of S4
=============

-   Same overall dispatching logic as S3, but more formal
-   Classes, methods and generics are all explicit and can be inspected
    with introspection tools
-   Supports custom validity checks
